Wretched of the Earth

Leprosy. Just the word scares most people. There is an international convention that discourages the use of the word ‘leper’ because of its terrible connotations. The moment we think of a person afflicted with leprosy we think of a beggar or a person who has lost some fingers or toes. People suffering from leprosy are often ostracized by society. There are many myths regarding this dreaded disease
—that it is contagious, that it is hereditary, and so on. These are just myths. In fact, not all cases of leprosy are contagious. If proper treatment is taken at an early stage, leprosy can be cured completely, leaving behind none of the telltale physical disfigurement that sometimes accompanies the disease. Normally, the treatment period is long. It requires a lot of patience and family support. Due to ignorance, however, people neglect early symptoms. Detection in the initial stages often does not take place, though the media carries advertisements about how to recognize the symptoms. Most people just don’t bother. We always think that leprosy is a problem that affects other people, not us. We forget that disease knows no social hierarchy; it does not distinguish between rich or poor, man or woman. And leprosy is a disease that has been with mankind for many centuries.
One of the programmes of the organization with which I am associated is to help people suffering from leprosy. There are different theories in this field.
Some people think that the patients should stay with their families, while others believe they should be kept in an isolated colony. I was working in a remote area where there was a separate colony for leprosy patients. It was a hot summer and temperatures were difficult to bear. The scene at the colony was depressing.
Most of the inmates were clearly disgusted with the disease and their sufferings.
 
They were all poor and helpless. They required psychological as well as material help. Even soothing words like, ‘Don’t worry, we’re here with you,’ were important to them.
Our project’s aim was not to show pity or to hand out money. We planned to rehabilitate the patients economically. If they could handle even some limited work and earn their own livelihood, then we were ready to finance them. We figured it was the best way to make them feel confident. For when a person feels confident, he can face society. Acceptance by society and a reasonable measure of economic independence can change the lives of these people.
There were many huts in the colony, with a family staying in each hut. In every family, at least one person was afflicted by the disease. The weather was harsh but I had to do my duty and go from hut to hut. The women kept telling me their difficulties. Perhaps the most frustrating of these was their inability to get jobs even as housemaids because of the disease. Some of them had resigned themselves to their fate. Youngsters were sleeping even though it was only mid- morning. Children were playing in the dirt. The older people were in a pathetic state. When the infirmities of age are added to the ravages of a disease like leprosy and the consequent social ostracism, people can be driven to suicide.
There was a small hut with a thatched roof, clay walls and the bare semblance of a bamboo door. A woman lived there, the oldest in the colony. Her name was Veeramma. I called out to her and asked her to come out. She did not. I thought she might be partially deaf and that it would be better if I went in to talk to her. I knocked carefully at what passed for a door, lest it fall down. She still did not respond or come out. I pushed the door open and went in.
There was hardly anything in the hut. Holes in the roof let in some air and light. There were two or three earthen pots and one earthen plate. Three stones made up a stove. There was a torn mat, two or three onions on the ground and a pot of water. I still could not see Veeramma inside the hut, but I could hear the sound of breathing. As I had entered the hut from the bright sunlight outside, it took my eyes a while to adjust to the darkness inside.
I called out to her softly once more, ‘Veeramma, I want to talk to you. Where are you?’
Then she answered, ‘Amma, I am here. But don’t come near me.’
 
Now I could see the frail form of a woman in the corner of the room, all her hairy grey skin shrunk, no flesh on the body. She was just a skeleton covered with skin. She was sitting in a corner holding her hands against her chest, her legs also drawn towards her chest.
‘Amma,’ she mumbled, ‘I know you called me several times, but I could not come out to talk to you. I am a woman. Irrespective of my age, how can I come out in front of other people without any clothes?’
It was then that I realized that she was almost naked.
I have seen poverty-stricken areas in the course of my work and I have met a lot of poor people, but nowhere had I seen a woman like this. This was a picture of dehumanizing poverty in our own country after fifty years of independence. An old woman could not even cover her body. Still she had no complaints about anything. I felt guilty wearing a six-yard sari.
For a minute, I felt too ashamed to talk. The shock of what I saw made me forget our policy of simply not handing out money and material. This was a situation that cried out for immediate remedy. I sent my driver to get 100 saris to be given to all the women in that colony. Whether they are rehabilitated or not, the minimum need of covering a woman’s body could not wait. A gesture like this may not change a great deal in their lives. But the sight of abject misery often prods us into action, even if it is just an impulse. Those of us who have a generous share of God’s blessings must do what we can to help the poorest of the poor who are wretched through no fault of theirs.
India does not always mean technology, fashion, films or beauty contests. The real India is in the dark, neglected interiors of our country. Helpless and miserably poor people live beyond the reach of any government departments. To serve our country means to serve such people.
After that visit to the colony of leprosy patients, I make it a point to carry at least ten saris with me whenever I go on my rounds.
